Main Manuscript for
Prospects for Detecting Signs of Life on Exoplanets in the JWST Era
Sara Seager1,2,3,*, Luis Welbanks4, Lucas Ellerbroek5, William Bains6, Janusz J. Petkowski7,8
1

Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Department of Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA
4
School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
5
Department of Astrophysics / IMAPP, Radboud University, PO Box 9010, 6500 GL, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
6
School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, 4 The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, UK
7
JJ Scientific, Warsaw, Mazowieckie, Poland
8
Faculty of Environmental Engineering, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, 50-370 Wroclaw,
Poland
*Corresponding author: Sara Seager
Email: seager@mit.edu
Preprint Servers: N/A.
Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation (S.S). Writing—review and editing (L.W., L.E.,
W.B., J.J.P.). All authors have reviewed the manuscript and agree with the results.
Competing Interest Statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Classification: Physical Sciences; Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences
Keywords: Exoplanets, JWST, planetary atmospheres, biosignature gases.
This PDF file includes: Main Text; Figures 1 to 5; Table 1.

Abstract
The search for signs of life in the Universe has entered a new phase with the advent of
the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). Detecting biosignature gases via exoplanet
atmosphere transmission spectroscopy is in principle within JWST’s reach. We reflect
on JWST’s early results in the context of the potential search for biological activity on
exoplanets. The results confront us with a complex reality. Established inverse methods
to interpret observed spectra—already known to be highly averaged representations of
intricate 3D atmospheric processes—can lead to disparate interpretations even with
JWST’s quality of data. Characterizing rocky or sub-Neptune-size exoplanets with
JWST is an intricate task, and moves us away from the notion of finding a definitive
“silver bullet” biosignature gas. Indeed, JWST results necessitate us to allow ‘parallel
interpretations’ that will perhaps not be resolved until the next generation of
observatories. Nonetheless, with a handful of habitable-zone planet atmospheres
accessible given the anticipated noise floor, JWST may continue to contribute to this
journey by designating a planet as biosignature gas candidate. To do this we will need
to sufficiently refine our inverse methods and physical models for confidently quantifying
specific gas abundances and constraining the atmosphere context. Looking ahead,

future telescopes and innovative observational strategies will be essential for the
reliable detection of biosignature gases.

Main Text
1. Introduction
The quest to understand life beyond Earth is one as old as humanity itself. Since the
earliest days of modern astronomy, the presence of oxygen (O2) in Earth’s atmosphere
was recognized as due to, and hence to be a signature of, life (1). Oxygen appeared in
Earth’s atmosphere at least 2.7 billion years ago (2) when primitive cyanobacteria evolved
to perform photosynthesis, converting carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) into
carbohydrates and oxygen, using sunlight. This process changed the chemical
composition of Earth’s atmosphere by introducing O2.
From an exoplanetary perspective, Earth's 20% atmospheric oxygen is anomalous due
to oxygen's high reactivity, sustained by oxygenic photosynthesis. An extraterrestrial
civilization with advanced telescopic technologies observing Earth, could interpret O2’s
high concentration as a strong indicator of life.
Oxygen is the paradigmatic example of a “biosignature gas”, a gas that is produced by
life and accumulates to high enough atmospheric abundances to be detected with remote
telescopes. Yet despite evidence pointing to the very early origin of oxygenic
photosynthesis 3.5 Gya (3), O2 took billions of years to accumulate to its present-day
values of 20% even whilst O2-producing life was present (4). Therefore, during much of
the time when we are confident that Earth was inhabited, O2 was at most a trace
component of the atmosphere.
Molecules other than O2 should therefore be considered as potential biosignature gases.
Earth’s biosphere generates thousands of different volatile molecules for various
reasons—as waste products from exploiting chemical potential energy gradients, for
signaling or defense against predators, to name a few—which could be mirrored or
replaced by different compounds on other worlds. Indeed, aside from the noble gases,
every gas in Earth’s atmosphere to part-per-trillion levels is produced by biological activity
(5), although most gases have a primary source other than life. Extensive exploration of
different gases, not just those produced in significant quantities by life on Earth, is needed.
We now have our first real opportunity to search for exoplanet atmosphere biosignature
gases with the recently operational James Webb Space Telescope (JWST; (6))—a
search that is becoming an expanding area of research within Astrobiology. We aim to
assess the present opportunities and challenges to using the JWST to search for
exoplanet atmosphere signs of life. We begin with a review of JWST’s enabling
photometric precision as it relates to target planet numbers (Section 2) and continue with
prospects and pitfalls via current exoplanet atmosphere interpretation methods (Section
3). We directly discuss the prospects for JWST to detect biosignature gases (Section 4),

and conclude with future needs including innovative methods and new telescopes
(Section 5).

2. JWST Transmission Spectroscopy Precision and Habitable-Zone Targets
To understand the prospect of detecting biosignature gases with JWST we summarize a
defining JWST observation related to its data precision and noise floor, and estimate what
this noise floor translates into for numbers of targets suitable for biosignature gas
searches. JWST uses transmission spectroscopy (7, 8), the dimming of a star as a planet
transits across its face, allowing us to analyze the starlight filtered through the planet’s
atmosphere (Figure 1). This method reveals variations in atmospheric composition across
different wavelengths due to selective absorption by atmospheric gases. Other JWST
atmosphere observation methods do not reach habitable-zone temperate exoplanets1.
Such a planet’s low infrared emission will be overshadowed by radiation from their host
stars, making them unsuitable for secondary eclipse spectroscopy, and their small planetstar separations makes them unsuitable for direct imaging.

Figure 1. Wasp 39b transmission spectrum. The planet size (shown as amount of light blocked) changes with wavelengths,
increasing where individual gases are strongly absorbing. Figure credit: NASA, ESA, CSA, STScI.

Among JWST’s many notable observations, we highlight an early, striking demonstration
of JWST’s unprecedented precision, leading to the unequivocal, robust detection of
carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere of the “hot Saturn” exoplanet WASP-39b (Mp =

The habitable zone is the region around a star in which a planet may maintain liquid water on its
surface, based on its surface temperature for a planet atmosphere heated by the radiation from the host
star.
1

0.28 MJ, Rp = 1.27 RJ, P
= 4.1 days, Teq ~1100 K;
Figure 1; (9)). The
detection of CO2 is
striking because CO₂’s
spectral band is clearly
visible “by eye” in the
data. Despite not being
the dominant carbonbearing
species
in
WASP-39b’s hydrogendominated atmosphere,
CO₂ strongly absorbs
infrared light, creating a Figure 2. Spectroscopic photometric precision of WASP-39b. The precision (y-axis) as
distinct spectral feature. a function of wavelength (x-axis) for different JWST instruments (colors, as noted in
Sulfur dioxide (SO₂), the legend). As an Early Release Science Program target, WASP-39b was observed
also detected in WASP- with each JWST instrument, NIRISS SOSS (0.6−2.8 μm), NIRSpec G395H (2.7−5.2
39b’s
atmosphere, μm), NIRSpec PRISM (0.5−5.5 μm), NIRCam F322W2 (2.0−4.0 μm), and MIRI-LRS
arises
from (5.0−12.0 μm). While the precision in the measured transit depth is chromatic and
dependent on the stellar spectrum, the spectrum of WASP-39b shows precisions below
photochemical reactions 200 ppm between 1.0−5.0 μm. Not shown is that the spectroscopic light curve data
rather than predicted precision is close to the photon-limited noise (9). Data from (56) and Welbanks (priv.
chemical
equilibrium comm).
(10). This highlights the
complexities of exoplanet atmospheres, and marks a shift towards a new subfield of
astrochemistry. We emphasize that WASP-39b is a giant exoplanet too hot for life
beneath its massive hydrogen-helium envelope.
With one transit for the relatively bright star WASP-39, JWST has achieved 50 ppm
precision (Figure 2), demonstrating performance of the telescope at the spectroscopic
light curve close to the photon-limited noise (9). The 50 ppm value is similar to that
achieved by other observational programs for sub Neptunes and super-Earths (11–13).
JWST’s true noise floor can only be assessed with several combined transits, to
disentangle photon noise from actual instrumental limitations. Although this assessment
is ongoing, we adopt a 30 ppm noise floor value for the purposes of this review.
By noise floor, we mean the minimum level of unwanted signal arising from a combination
of factors related to the instrument and observational environment (e.g., thermal
fluctuations, mechanical vibrations, characteristics of the infrared detectors, and unknown
sources) (14,15). This variety of contributing factors makes the noise floor best
determined empirically.
We can qualitatively investigate what kind, and how many, exoplanets in their host star’s
habitable zone are accessible under the 30 ppm noise floor. We estimate the transmission
spectroscopy signal (TS), by taking the area of a three scale height (H) tall atmosphere
annulus compared to the area of a homogeneous background star.

𝑇𝑆 ≈

6𝐻𝑅𝑝
𝑅∗2

(Equation 1)

Here Rp and R* are the planet and star radius respectively. H is defined as 𝐻 = 𝑘𝑇/𝑚𝑔,
where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is temperature, m is mean molecular mass, and g is
surface gravity.
We can immediately rule out the JWST transmission spectroscopy study of the
atmosphere of an Earth-like planet in an Earth-like orbit around a Sun-like stars from
Equation (1). Namely, Earth-like planets’ small sizes (Rp ~ 6400 km) and thin
atmospheres (H = 8 km) are impractical for transmission spectroscopy against the
backdrop of a Sun-sized star (R* ~ 700,000 km). Here TS ~ 1 ppm—far lower than the
adopted 30 ppm noise floor.
The observational favorability of M dwarf stars can also be seen from Equation (1). Since
M dwarf stars are half to one tenth of the size of our Sun, the TS will have signals 4 to
100 times larger than Sun-sized star hosts.
We can further use the approximate TS feasibility criteria to estimate the number of
habitable-zone exoplanets with accessible atmospheres. Considering the list of currently
observed or planned exoplanet targets from the JWST Cycles 1 through 3 from the
Transiting Exoplanets List of Space Telescope Spectroscopy Catalog (TrExoLiSTS) (14)
and estimating the surface temperature by the equilibrium temperature (Teq) with a cutoff
of 300 K for habitable-zone planets, we find only a few Earth-size planets (Rp ≤ 1.5
REarth), namely some of the Trappist-1 exoplanets and LP 791-18d. (Here Teq is the
effective temperature attained by an isothermal planet atmosphere after it has reached
complete equilibrium with the radiation from its parent star.
Sub Neptunes are of interest in the search for life not necessarily because they are
expected to be habitable, but because their likely H₂-dominated atmospheres with scale
heights 14 times larger than N₂-dominated atmospheres make them more favorable for
atmospheric observations. Some sub Neptunes are hypothesized to have liquid water
under the right conditions (15, 16). Regardless of the presence of water oceans, some
sub Neptunes may have water clouds, offering the potential for an aerial biosphere (17).
As many as half a dozen sub-Neptune-sized exoplanets (1.5 REarth ≤Rp ≤3 REarth) meet
our TS feasibility criteria, even with a conservative Teq cutoff of 373 K (100°C). However,
these planets are also likely too hot for life due to greenhouse effects from H₂ collisioninduced absorption (18). Observational biases from K2’s and TESS’s viewing segments
have favored shorter orbital periods, but ongoing TESS observations should uncover subNeptunes with longer periods and therefore cooler temperatures.
Although M dwarf stars are the only accessible temperate planet-hosting targets for
JWST, M dwarf stars present a challenge. Their stellar magnetic activity, higher than for
Solar-type stars, manifests as star spots, faculae, and flares that contaminate the spectra
(19). Star spots can mimic transit transmission spectra by the star’s inhomogeneity
(Figure 3). In the case of Trappist-1, the measured star contamination dominates the

signal (12). The community is intensively pursuing many ideas to mitigate or remove
contamination signals (19). Some stochastic variability might never be adequately
modeled and may just have to be accepted as part of the noise floor.

Figure 3. Star spot contamination in transit transmission spectra. Left: Transit depth varies with wavelength as a planet (black
circle) transits a star (orange disk) with an atmosphere (colored annuli), due to wavelength-dependent atmospheric
absorption. Middle: A star spot (black/gray semi-circle) alters the star's apparent size with wavelength, affecting the transit
depth even for a planet without an atmosphere. Right: The combined spectrum shows contributions from both the planet's
atmosphere and the star spot, complicating interpretation. Credit: Seager and Shapiro.

3. From Spectroscopy Measurements to Planetary Characterization
To understand the JWST's prospects for identifying biosignature gases, we begin by
examining ongoing planet characterization. We unpack the process of translating
observations into estimates of exoplanet properties, beginning with a general description,
then proceeding to a case study on sub-Neptunes, and concluding with the relevance for
biosignature gases.
It may seem a stretch to use spectra to ascertain planetary properties (atmosphere
abundances, surface and interior bulk composition, habitability and presence of life, and
more). After all, observed exoplanet spectra represent a highly averaged signal of
complex 3D physical and chemical atmospheric processes, reduced to relative changes
in the observed wavelength-dependence of the combined star and planet light as a point
source. We live with a family of potential solutions for planet properties that fit the current
imperfect and incomplete data. To quantify the range of planet properties, the community
resorts to atmosphere retrieval (20), an umbrella term for a subset of inverse methods.
This process determines the underlying atmospheric parameters that best match the
observations for a given model (see e.g., the review by (21)). The outcome is not only an
assessment of how well a specific model fits, but also a statistical measure of the likely
values for the model’s parameters, such as probable abundances of atmospheric gases.

Figure 4. Illustrative schematic of the atmospheric data analysis and interpretation process, from observations through
interpretation of an exoplanet's nature. The pathway involves four main steps: [1] taking observations; [2] processing the data
from pixels to a spectrum; [3] interpreting the resulting spectrum with model fits to infer planetary properties such as gas
abundances; and [4] drawing conclusions about the planet properties. The top row is inspired by WASP-107b (35) a relatively
straightforward case, and the bottom row is motivated by TOI 270d ((29)), a disputed planetary nature. All panels are
illustrative only. See text for details. Credit: Seager, Welbanks, Tilke.

Inferring planet properties from spectroscopic measurements is not straightforward as the
process involves a number of steps with subjective choices (Figure 4). Step 1 is the
telescope observations (i.e., raw pixel data). Step 2 is converting the observations into a
planetary spectrum via a data analysis pipeline, which always involves a number of
assumptions. Step 3 is producing the family of models that fit the data—inferring the
underlying planet atmosphere properties (i.e., temperature, gas abundances) from the
data. Step 3 is challenging due to the large number of free parameters in most models
compared to the number of data points, and the ensuing degeneracies between these
parameters. These challenges cause atmospheric retrieval to be highly sensitive to the
choice of model parameterization and model assumptions (see e.g., (22)), and in some
cases to small changes in the data and the structure of the data uncertainties. This can
result in inferred planet properties that are ultimately incorrect—and rejected by standard
frequentist metrics such as chi-squared statistics and p-value hypothesis testing.
Moreover, most atmospheric retrievals rely on the assumption of Gaussian uncorrelated
noise, whereas the data retrieved on has known correlated systematic noise. Step 4—
planetary interpretation—is not only the end goal but also the motivation for studying
exoplanet atmospheres. Step 4 includes identifying the planet archetype (e.g. “water
world” or “lava planet”), habitability, presence of biosignature gases, and more.
Unfortunately, Step 4 is the most subjective in the entire process of exoplanetary
characterization, and is still evolving. In some cases, the uncertainties arising from Steps
1-3 are so significant that they cannot rule out fundamentally different planet archetypes.
In other situations, the planet’s atmosphere is simply unrevealing of its nature. Unveiling
the 'truth' of a planet with incomplete and imperfect data and models is the ultimate test
of interpolation and extrapolation, yet a challenge we must embrace to characterize
exoplanets.
To illustrate the challenges faced by the atmospheric data analysis and interpretation
framework let us turn to examples of sub Neptunes. Sub Neptunes defy straightforward
classification because their average densities match a variety of bulk interiors. They could
be: water worlds with 50% or more water by mass with liquid water (or supercritical water)
ocean; scaled-down versions of Neptune with a thick H2-He envelope overlaying a layer

of hot dense water plasma over a rocky core; they could be predominantly composed of
silicates, but with a mixed hydrogen envelope possibly overlying a magma ocean (e.g.
(23)); or even scenarios we have yet to consider. The community has aimed to use
atmosphere measurements to sort through the possibilities for sub Neptune archetypes.
A classic example of the challenges in every step in the data-to-characterization process
is the case of K2-18b (Mp = 8.6 ME, Rp = 2.6 RE, P = 32.94 d, Teq ~ 260 K) (24, 25). Hubble
Space Telescope (HST) observations led to a detection of atmospheric water vapor in the
atmosphere of K2-18b (24, 26). Yet, later observations with the JWST found no water
vapor, and attributed the same atmospheric spectral feature to CH4 (16). Furthermore,
the non-detection of NH3 in K2-18b’s atmosphere was presented as a case for a Hycean
world (a planet with a liquid water ocean covered with a H2-dominated atmosphere), since
NH3 is highly soluble in liquid water thus explaining its absence (16). This conclusion was
later disputed, as nitrogen compounds are also highly soluble in magma, and therefore
the lack of NH3 could signify presence of a magma ocean, not a water ocean (27).
Therefore, it is important to recognize that the challenges in Step 2 to 3 have cascading
consequences all the way to the fourth and final step—the end goal of planet
characterization.
A second example is the sub Neptune exoplanet TOI-270d (Mp = 4.8 ME, Rp = 2.2 RE, P
= 11.38 days, Teq ~ 350 K) (28). The same observed pixels from JWST (Step 1) were
processed by independent teams (Step 2). Both teams agree that the signal in the data
is robust, and that the spectral features are attributed to CH4 and H2O. The inferred
abundances CH4 and H2O, however, were different between the teams (Step 3). These
differences, though small (1 to 2) led to inconsistent interpretations of the planetary
interior archetype (Step 4). One interpretation is a water-dominated planet with a hot
surface water ocean (29), another a massive, mixed atmosphere of H2, H2O, and CH4,
overlaying a rocky massive interior (30).
The TOI-270d observations are also a cautionary tale for the JWST future of biosignature
gas detection: the identification of both CH4 and H2O still led to conflicting interpretations
of planet archetype. Methane has been championed as a promising biosignature gas for
JWST rocky planets—but CH4’s biosignature status can only be inferred from the
presence of other gases, such as the simultaneous presence of CO2 in an atmosphere
but little CO (31). Presently, low SNR data yield differences in quantified gas abundances
of a factor ten to 100 or higher, so obtaining the necessary abundance constraints, key
for establishing the CH4 as a biosignature gas, may not be possible. We do, however,
echo the argument in favor of CH4 as a biosignature gas contender on rocky planets
without H2-dominated envelopes, due to its ease of detectability at JWST wavelengths
(32) and its difficulty being produced in high quantities by known abiotic sources (for an
oxidized mantle).
Further relevant to biosignature gases are that biosignature gases almost certainly
produce weak signals, as they would originate from thin atmospheres, and likely have low
abundances. In cases of low-SNR data with weak or statistically insignificant features,
retrieval techniques are often employed to claim detections. A ‘detection’ is sometimes

quantified by performing a model comparison between a reference model including the
specific parameter being investigated (e.g., a given biosignature gas) and a model
excluding the parameter of interest – as a pair of nested models. The model used as
reference to claim a detection may be unphysical, may not fit the data appropriately, and
may have other parameters with degeneracies relative to the parameter of interest. To
recap, the oversensitivity to small changes in the data, the potential trap of comparing two
incorrect models, and an opaque definition for the term ‘detection’ mean that using
atmospheric retrieval can cause erroneous reports of detection of biosignature gases
(33).
Let us step back and ask whether there are any straightforward cases of observations
leading to definitive interpretation. Indeed, the case for the warm Neptune WASP-107b
(Mp = 0.096 MJ, Rp = 0.96 RJ, P = 5.72 days, Teq ~ 750 K) (34) presents such an example.
Using our framework in Figure 4, WASP-107b was observed using JWST’s NIRCam (35)
and NIRSpec (36) instruments (Step 1). Data were processed using different independent
analysis pipelines (Step 2) and model fits via atmospheric retrieval agreed upon the
assessed CH4’s abundance. The inferred chemical abundances and temperature
structure (Step 3), even with the small differences present in Step 2 independent analysis,
indicate that the planet’s atmosphere is in a state of chemical disequilibrium, influenced
by photochemistry and, likely, tidal heating (Step 4).
WASP-107b exemplifies a straightforward case because it excels in three key criteria
critical to robust planet characterization: detection, attribution, and interpretation (see
Section 4 for further details). The planet’s high SNR data ensures a robust detection of
spectral features (Key Criterion 1: detection). Multiple spectral features of CH4 were
confidently attributed to the correct chemical species using different instruments and
independent pipelines, which strengthens confidence in the association between the
spectral features and the gases responsible for causing them (Key Criterion 2: attribution).
Finally, the derived planetary properties — such as chemical abundances, temperature
structure, and state of chemical disequilibrium — are consistent across independent
analyses, allowing for a confident interpretation of the planet’s atmospheric state (Key
Criterion 3: interpretation). These three criteria are essential for any atmospheric
investigations, particularly those aimed at identifying biosignature gases, where precision
in each of the three areas will be paramount.
Future exoplanet observations may not be as clear-cut as the WASP-107b example
presented above. Even in this seemingly straightforward case with strong SNR across
broad bands leading to high confidence in the presence of CH4, and hence of chemical
disequilibrium in the atmosphere, the results do not identify the driver of that
disequilibrium. The best path forward is one of cautious optimism, acknowledging the
limitations of our methods and data while striving to maximize the insights they offer.
Regarding model interpretation, the complexity of the problem often exceeds the fidelity
of even JWST data. Prioritizing high SNR features before delving into parameter
inference will be essential for reliable interpretations. Simultaneously, advancing models
and establishing physical “guardrails” are crucial steps to mitigate the subjective nature
of the interpretation exercise. Perhaps for any “biosignature gas candidates”, we may

hope for a situation similar to WASP-107b: an atmosphere highly out of chemical
equilibrium (not due to UV-driven photochemistry), recognizable as such even under
varying model assumptions.

4. Biosignature Gas Prospects with JWST
There are three Key Criteria for definitive exoplanet findings, that are also relevant for
biosignature gases.
1. Detection: Is the signal robust?
o

For biosignature gases, the robustness of an unambiguous signal
detection is highly relevant as any candidate signals are almost certainly
going to be weak due to tiny atmospheres on rocky exoplanets and low
anticipated atmospheric abundances.

2. Attribution: Are the spectral features correctly attributed to the appropriate
gas(es)?
o

For biosignature gases, this involves identifying a distinctive spectral
signature that stands out from dominant background atmospheric gases
and that is unequivocally attributable to the candidate gas.

3. Interpretation: How reliable are the derived planetary properties?
o

For biosignature gases, this includes ensuring that the detected signal is
not confounded by false positives (Table S2) and corresponds to plausible
production rates.

In this Section we review current thinking on false positives and biosignature gas
production rates (Section 4.1). We next present the growing list of biosignature gases,
considering false positives and production rates (Section 4.2). We conclude with a review
of the tentative claim of a JWST biosignature gas detection, as confronted against the
above three Key Criteria (Section 4.3).
4.1 A Framework for Evaluating Potential of Biosignature Gases Detection
Ahead of observations, the community can make a list of promising biosignature gases
by systematically assessing the potential of thousands of gases known to exist ((5);
Figure 5). The process begins by determining whether a gas of interest has prominent
and distinctive spectral features that stand out from anticipated background atmospheric
gases (related to ease of detection and attribution). This is followed by considering
potential false positives and, primarily, photochemical stability (both related to
interpretation).

Figure 5. Schematic of a biosignature gas evaluation framework for thousands of gases. The first "triage" step identifies gases
with prominent, distinctive spectral features. The second "evaluation" step focuses on photochemistry, assessing a molecule’s
atmospheric survival and whether biological production rates, compared to Earth's biofluxes, are plausible. Credit: Seager and
Zhan.

Biosignature Gas False Positives
Fundamental to the interpretation of biosignature gases is the exclusion of false positives,
that is gases that can be produced by abiotic processes as well as by life. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) is an obvious example, because although ubiquitously produced by life on Earth,
CO2 is also a significant background atmosphere gas, produced by volcanic processes
and atmospheric photochemistry, and is therefore a dominant carbon species in planetary
atmospheres. Molecular oxygen (O2), despite being a favored biosignature gas, may have
an abiotic source from evaporating oceans, originating from a runaway greenhouse effect
(37), especially for a planet with close-to-host-star orbit or low mantle FeO and H2O
inventories (38). For a review of O2 and its false positives, see (39). One may estimate a
potential biosignature gas’s false positive propensity by a thermodynamic assessment of
one or a pair of gases due to volcanic activity. (See the CH4 vs. CO2 vs. CO example in
Section 3)
One concept of robust identification against false positives is that of chemical
disequilibrium—the simultaneous presence of reduced and oxidized species in the
planet’s atmosphere. The disequilibrium of Earth’s O2 and CH4 has been considered for
decades as a template for life’s expression (40). Methane is speculated to have been
present in abundances high enough to warm Earth against the faint young Sun (41).
However, the O2 and CH4 pair is unlikely to be detectable by JWST due to challenges of
detecting O2 (spectra feature at too short of a wavelength) and O3, which is a proxy for
O2 (low instrument sensitivity at longer wavelengths). Further opposition to atmospheric
chemical disequilibrium as a sign of life is the realization that such disequilibrium is a
feature of most planets though the degree of chemical disequilibrium is variable. Lastly,
in some cases, chemical disequilibrium may indicate the absence of life, as chemotrophic
life forms utilize and diminish thermodynamic disequilibria in their environment,
suggesting that disequilibrium could imply no life is present to exploit it. For example,

methanotrophic bacteria take up CH4 and O2 and release CO2, thus reducing the CH4 (or
O2) levels in their environment to negligible levels.
Ideally, the community would develop highly sophisticated computer models to assess
and even rule out false positives, by tracing a wide variety of gases through extensive
planet evolution and ongoing interior and atmosphere processes. The presence of trace
gases depends on specific planetary conditions that involve a layer of profound
complexity and significant uncertainty (e.g., (42)). A large number of unknown parameters
accompany the vast array of relevant geophysical processes, including: volcanic
outgassing from—and ingassing to—planetary mantles; mantle evolution; mantle
convection; magmatic outgassing; atmospheric escape; crustal oxidation; continental and
sea floor weathering; deep volatile cycling; ongoing chemical segregation between a
planetary core, mantle, and atmosphere, as well as surface, atmospheric and cloud nonequilibrium photochemical processes (e.g., (23)). One effort uses a Monte Carlo approach
to sample a wide range of unknown parameters and initial conditions to connect magma
ocean crystallization to temperate geochemical cycling (43). The overall complexity is
problematic and adds heavily to the model inference problem by increasing the number
of free parameters nearly without bound—most parameters are unobservable
for exoplanets (Section 3).
Plausible Production Rates: Source vs. Sinks
To evaluate a potential biosignature gas we must consider its source rate vs. sink rate.
The dominant sink is photochemistry (Figure 5), which is the key controlling factor for
gas accumulation in an atmosphere. This is because trace gases, including
biosignatures, are rapidly degraded by photochemical reactions. Gases are either
directly destroyed by the host star’s incident UV radiation or readily react with other
abundant photochemically-produced atmospheric species, such as OH, H and halogen
radicals. A first assessment step is to calculate the gas abundance required to generate
a detectable spectral feature, through forward modeling. This step naturally includes a
distinguishability criterion, namely that the gas should have one or more spectral
features that are distinctive compared to anticipated background gases. The second
step is to evaluate the candidate biosignature gas production rates, necessary for its
accumulation in an exoplanet’s atmosphere, against photochemical destruction and
other sinks. A final step, if feasible, is to estimate the corresponding biomass (44). If the
necessary production rates are excessively high then it is improbable for such gases to
accumulate to detectable levels, or it might indicate an unrealistically large biomass.
This framework intends to be pragmatic “reality check”. Admittedly, “plausible”
production rate is qualitative, but we may for example, use a comparison to Earth’s
production rates.
We emphasize that detectable levels that come out of computer simulations are gases
with abundances of typically 1 to 100 ppm, much higher than biological or other trace
gases of 1 ppt or 1 ppb typically reached in Earth’s atmosphere (e.g., (5)). What is
important to recognize is a candidate biosignature gas must saturate any sink, not just
photochemical; surface sinks as well, including water oceans. Photochemical destruction
rates are driven by the UV radiation from the host star and directly set the required

biological production rates (45). The need for a deep understanding of photochemistry for
biosignature gas studies echoes the giant exoplanet atmosphere frontier: a merging of
astronomy and a new subbranch of astrochemistry (Section 2).

Gas

Distinctive
Spectral
Features (vs
dominant gas)

Plausible
Production Rate

No Known
Significant False
Positives
(Context)

O2

✓

✓

X

CH4

✓

✓

X

N2O

✓

(✓)

(✓)

CH3Cl

✓

✓

(✓)

CH3Br

✓

✓

(✓)

CH3OH

✓

X

✓

CH3SH

✓

✓

X

DMS

✓

✓

X

PH3

✓

(✓)

✓

Relatively reactive

NH3

✓

X

✓

Highly water soluble

Isoprene

✓

X

✓

Reactive

Carbonyls

X

X

X

Highly water soluble

HCN

✓

✓

X

NO2

✓

✓

X

SF6

✓

X

✓

Technosignature gas

NF3

✓

X

✓

Technosignature gas

CFCs

✓

(✓)

✓

Technosignature gas

PFCs

✓

(✓)

✓

Technosignature gas

Comments

Highly water soluble

Table 1. A list of potential biosignature gases with subjective evaluation. Reasonable production rate is subjective and may be
qualified as compared to Earth values or Earth’s O2 production rate. See SI for a nearly exhaustive, referenced list of biosignature
gases proposed so far.

4.2 A Growing List of Biosignature Gases
Many gases beyond O2 and CH4 have been studied as potential biosignature gases (see
(46) and references therein). We present a summary in Table 1, followed by a nearly
complete list of candidate biosignature gases studied to date in the SI. A glance at Table
1 will show that there are no biosignature gases that fulfill all the criteria for robust

statements about the presence of life. We omit non-gas biosignatures (e.g., hazes, the
red edge, algal bloom color changes, bioluminescence) as well as anti-biosignatures and
false negatives, since robust assessment of these is infeasible in the JWST era (Section
3).

4.3 JWST’s First Tentatively Claimed Biosignature Gas
We are off to a problematic start for biosignature gases with JWST, with the potential
claim of dimethyl sulfide ((CH3)2S; DMS) in the atmosphere of the sub Neptune K2-18b
(16). In this scenario K2-18b is a presumed “Hycean World” with a H2-dominated
atmosphere above a water ocean. The DMS detection or non detection depends on
treatment of an instrumental offset which may cause a slight discontinuity in the data.
Furthermore, the tentative 2.4 detection refers to the preference of a reference model
consisting of 11 chemical species including 5 potential biosignature gases, including
DMS, relative to a model with 10 chemical species of which 4 are potential biosignature
gases not including DMS. That is, what is called a tentative detection hinges on a specific
offset treatment and presumes that a model with 5 potential biosignatures is an
appropriate reference. Regardless of offset treatment and parameter degeneracies, at
face value, there is no robust statistical significance of the DMS spectral feature in the
data. Instead, the detection relies on the retrieval process itself (See Section 3).
The concept of DMS in K2-18b is further explored by (47) with atmosphere computer
simulations for DMS and other sulfur biosignature gases across a wide range of biological
fluxes and stellar UV environments. For a mixture of DMS and other sulfur gases to reach
JWST detectable levels (i.e. above ~ppm levels detectable in five transits) in K2-18b, the
required volatile sulfur-compound biological flux is ~20 times higher than that of DMS’ on
modern Earth, as balanced against photochemical sinks.
The example of the tentative detection of DMS in K2-18b’s atmosphere is the exoplanet
community’s first encounter with a biosignature gas prospect—a claim that fails all three
Key Criteria above. The detection is not robust; the signal is not statistically significant
(~3) and is sensitive to an instrumental offset. The attribution of the signal may be
incorrect, as other sulfur gases share spectral features (48). Interpreting DMS as a
biosignature must be confronted with potential abiotic formation scenarios (Table S2).
The DMS attribution challenges echo lessons from the initial K2-18b H2O detection (24,
26) later argued to be (49) and confirmed as CH4 (16). While higher SNR, higher spectral
resolution data with broader wavelength coverage that encompass several DMS spectral
features may help resolve the first two criteria, the third—interpretation—may remain
unresolved due to unknown atmospheric contexts and processes.
For other suggested yet contentious biosignature gas reports, PH3 on Venus, CH4 on
Mars, and HCN as a prebiotic gas on GJ 1132 b, see the SI.

5. Reflecting on the Future of Biosignature Detection
We conclude with the sobering realization that with JWST we may never be able to
definitively claim the discovery of a biosignature gas in an exoplanet atmosphere. This
realization is largely motivated by the challenge of the interpretation of false positives
amidst the unknown planetary environments. But it is also exacerbated by the limited
number of targets (Section 2), the likelihood that the spectral feature signals will be weak
for small planet atmospheres (Section 2), and the limitations of the inference methods
required to wrestle sparse data of a spatially and vertically unresolved planet into useful
constraints on underlying planet atmosphere gas abundances (Section 3).
To confidently achieve the goal of identifying exoplanet biosignature gas candidates we
should:
• Solve the effect of contamination by stellar magnetic activity;
• Discover long-period sub Neptune targets that are colder than our current crop and
use atmosphere observations to infer if any may harbor a temperate water ocean;
• Refine our atmospheric retrieval methods;
• Build our list of plausible biosignature gases readily accessible by JWST, including
the gases required for context.
On the theory side, we can develop a legitimate biosignature gas assessment pathway
requiring a “Deep Planet Simulator”. We may strive to develop comprehensive models for
exoplanet interiors, akin to the elaborate Illustris cosmological simulation of galaxy
formation (50). However, the cosmologists have a “unified theory” to test and refine,
whereas the exoplanetary community is far from any unified theory of planetary
habitability. By modeling from deep cores through dynamic mantles to complex
atmospheres, we could seek to understand the conditions that might support identification
of biosignature gases over false positives. However, unlike for galaxy formation and
evolution models which were bolstered by increasing spatial resolution via new
telescopes over time, there is no way to validate exoplanet interior computer models using
remote sensing of spatially averaged atmospheres. As components of these models
evolve and integrate experimental data, their credibility in identifying potential
biosignatures will be a focal point of rigorous debate. Lab experiments need to be
expanded on, as well as further synergies with the Solar System community.
Beyond JWST, we can pursue the discovery of an Earth twin around a Sun-like star using
future high-contrast starlight-suppression direct imaging such as space-based mission
concepts like NASA’s Habitable Worlds Observatory, Starshade (51), and the Large
Interferometer for Exoplanets (LIFE) (52), or even ground-based observatories (53). A
familiar scenario, with an Earth-like atmospheric mix of O2 and water (as opposed to a
super-Earth around an M dwarf star) might yield more definitive answers, but likely will
still face the wide unknowns of planetary context.
We can investigate technosignature gases—artificially produced volatiles, either
intentional or accidental, by advanced civilization (54). For example, fluorine is largely
avoided by life on Earth but widely used in human-made products. While

technosignatures might overlap with biosignature gases if alien life uses fluorine, fluorinebased technosignatures have few, if any, false positives (Table S2).
Ultimately, we seek fundamentally new technological approaches for exoplanet
observations. Real breakthroughs will come from audacious projects like the Solar
Gravitational Lens telescope, positioned 500 AU from Earth to exploit the Sun as a
gravitational lens (55), or from the Starshot initiative, which envisions sending thousands
of space chips with solar sails to pass by a planet and capture brief, yet potentially
revealing, snapshots to send back to Earth.
The exoplanet community has come a long way in 30 years, establishing that exoplanets
are common, and that rocky planets exist, including some that may have surface liquid
water. We expect to find biosignature gas candidates, even if we cannot guarantee they
are signs of life—an uncertainty we will have to live with for now. In the years to come,
JWST will remain the flagship of this era of discovery, and will be remembered as the first
telescope that set the first concrete steps toward answering the question: Are we alone?
Acknowledgements
We thank Julien de Wit and Renyu Hu for useful discussions.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

J. Jeans, The universe around us (Cambridge [Eng.] : University Press, 1930).
A. Pellerin, et al., Neoarchaean oxygen-based nitrogen cycle en route to the
Great Oxidation Event. Nature, 1–6 (2024).
G. P. Fournier, et al., The Archean origin of oxygenic photosynthesis and extant
cyanobacterial lineages. Proc. R. Soc. B 288, 20210675 (2021).
H. D. Holland, The oxygenation of the atmosphere and oceans. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. B Biol. Sci. 361, 903–915 (2006).
S. Seager, W. Bains, J. J. Petkowski, Toward a List of Molecules as Potential
Biosignature Gases for the Search for Life on Exoplanets and Applications to
Terrestrial Biochemistry. Astrobiology 16, 465–485 (2016).
J. P. Gardner, et al., The James Webb space telescope. Space Sci. Rev. 123,
485–606 (2006).
S. Seager, D. D. Sasselov, Theoretical transmission spectra during extrasolar
giant planet transits. Astrophys. J. 537, 916 (2000).
D. Charbonneau, T. M. Brown, R. W. Noyes, R. L. Gilliland, Detection of an
extrasolar planet atmosphere. Astrophys. J. 568, 377 (2002).
E. Ahrer, et al., Identification of carbon dioxide in an exoplanet atmosphere.
Nature 614, 649–652 (2023).
S.-M. Tsai, et al., Photochemically produced SO2 in the atmosphere of WASP39b. Nature 617, 483–487 (2023).
T. G. Beatty, et al., Sulfur Dioxide and Other Molecular Species in the Atmosphere
of the Sub-Neptune GJ 3470 b. Astrophys. J. Lett. 970, L10 (2024).
O. Lim, et al., Atmospheric Reconnaissance of TRAPPIST-1 b with JWST/NIRISS:
Evidence for Strong Stellar Contamination in the Transmission Spectra.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.

Astrophys. J. 955, L22–L22 (2023).
E. M. May, et al., Double trouble: two transits of the super-Earth GJ 1132 b
observed with JWST NIRSpec G395H. Astrophys. J. Lett. 959, L9 (2023).
N. K. Nikolov, A. Kovacs, C. Martlin, TrExoLiSTS: Transiting Exoplanets List of
Space Telescope Spectroscopy. Res. Notes AAS 6, 272 (2022).
L. A. Rogers, S. Seager, Three possible origins for the gas layer on GJ 1214B.
Astrophys. J. 716, 1208–1216 (2010).
N. Madhusudhan, et al., Carbon-bearing molecules in a possible hycean
atmosphere. Astrophys. J. Lett. 956, L13 (2023).
S. Seager, et al., Possibilities for an Aerial Biosphere in Temperate Sub NeptuneSized Exoplanet Atmospheres. Universe 7, 172 (2021).
R. Pierrehumbert, E. Gaidos, Hydrogen greenhouse planets beyond the habitable
zone. Astrophys. J. Lett. 734, L13 (2011).
B. V Rackham, et al., The effect of stellar contamination on low-resolution
transmission spectroscopy: needs identified by NASA’s Exoplanet Exploration
Program Study Analysis Group 21. RAS Tech. Instruments 2, 148–206 (2023).
N. Madhusudhan, S. Seager, A temperature and abundance retrieval method for
exoplanet atmospheres. Astrophys. J. 707, 24 (2009).
N. Madhusudhan, Atmospheric retrieval of exoplanets. arXiv Prepr.
arXiv1808.04824 (2018).
L. Welbanks, N. Madhusudhan, On degeneracies in retrievals of exoplanetary
transmission spectra. Astron. J. 157, 206 (2019).
T. Lichtenberg, Y. Miguel, “Super-Earths and Earth-like exoplanets” in Treatise on
Geochemistry (Third Edition), A. Anbar, D. B. T.-T. on G. (Third edition) Weis, Eds.
(Elsevier, 2025), pp. 51–112.
B. Benneke, et al., Water vapor and clouds on the habitable-zone sub-Neptune
exoplanet K2-18b. Astrophys. J. Lett. 887, L14 (2019).
R. Cloutier, et al., Confirmation of the radial velocity super-Earth K2-18c with
HARPS and CARMENES. Astron. Astrophys. 621, A49 (2019).
A. Tsiaras, I. P. Waldmann, G. Tinetti, J. Tennyson, S. N. Yurchenko, Water vapour
in the atmosphere of the habitable-zone eight-Earth-mass planet K2-18 b. Nat.
Astron. 3, 1086–1091 (2019).
O. Shorttle, S. Jordan, H. Nicholls, T. Lichtenberg, D. J. Bower, Distinguishing
oceans of water from magma on mini-Neptune K2-18b. Astrophys. J. Lett. 962, L8
(2024).
M. N. Günther, et al., A super-Earth and two sub-Neptunes transiting the nearby
and quiet M dwarf TOI-270. Nat. Astron. 3, 1099–1108 (2019).
M. Holmberg, N. Madhusudhan, Possible Hycean conditions in the sub-Neptune
TOI-270 d. Astron. Astrophys. 683, L2 (2024).
B. Benneke, et al., JWST Reveals CH4, CO2, and H2O in a Metal-rich Miscible
Atmosphere on a Two-Earth-Radius Exoplanet. arXiv, 2403.03325 (2024).
J. Krissansen-Totton, S. Olson, D. C. Catling, Disequilibrium biosignatures over
Earth history and implications for detecting exoplanet life. Sci. Adv. 4, eaao5747
(2018).
M. A. Thompson, J. Krissansen-Totton, N. Wogan, M. Telus, J. J. Fortney, The
case and context for atmospheric methane as an exoplanet biosignature. Proc.

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.

Natl. Acad. Sci. 119, e2117933119 (2022).
L. Welbanks, P. McGill, M. Line, N. Madhusudhan, On the application of Bayesian
leave-one-out cross-validation to exoplanet atmospheric analysis. Astron. J. 165,
112 (2023).
D. R. Anderson, et al., The discoveries of WASP-91b, WASP-105b and WASP107b: Two warm Jupiters and a planet in the transition region between ice giants
and gas giants. Astron. Astrophys. 604, A110 (2017).
L. Welbanks, et al., A high internal heat flux and large core in a warm neptune
exoplanet. Nature 630, 836–840 (2024).
D. K. Sing, et al., A warm Neptune’s methane reveals core mass and vigorous
atmospheric mixing. Nature 630, 831–835 (2024).
J. F. Kasting, J. B. Pollack, D. Crisp, Effects of high CO2 levels on surface
temperature and atmospheric oxidation state of the early Earth. J. Atmos. Chem.
1, 403–428 (1984).
R. D. Wordsworth, L. K. Schaefer, R. A. Fischer, Redox Evolution via Gravitational
Differentiation on Low-mass Planets: Implications for Abiotic Oxygen, Water Loss,
and Habitability. Astron. J. 155, 195 (2018).
V. S. Meadows, et al., Exoplanet Biosignatures: Understanding Oxygen as a
Biosignature in the Context of Its Environment. Astrobiology 18, 630–662 (2018).
J. Krissansen-Totton, D. S. Bergsman, D. C. Catling, On detecting biospheres
from chemical thermodynamic disequilibrium in planetary atmospheres.
Astrobiology 16, 39–67 (2016).
J. F. Kasting, K. J. Zahnle, J. C. G. Walker, Photochemistry of methane in the
Earth’s early atmosphere. Precambrian Res. 20, 121–148 (1983).
V. Dehant, et al., Geoscience for understanding habitability in the solar system
and beyond. Space Sci. Rev. 215, 1–48 (2019).
J. Krissansen‐Totton, J. J. Fortney, F. Nimmo, N. Wogan, Oxygen False Positives
on Habitable Zone Planets Around Sun‐Like Stars. AGU Adv. 2, e2020AV000294
(2021).
S. Seager, W. Bains, R. Hu, A biomass-based model to estimate the plausibility of
exoplanet biosignature gases. Astrophys. J. 775, 104 (2013).
S. Ranjan, et al., Photochemical Runaway in Exoplanet Atmospheres:
Implications for Biosignatures. Astrophys. J. 930, 131 (2022).
E. W. Schwieterman, et al., Exoplanet Biosignatures: A Review of Remotely
Detectable Signs of Life. Astrobiology 18, 663–708 (2018).
S.-M. Tsai, H. Innes, N. F. Wogan, E. W. Schwieterman, Biogenic sulfur gases as
biosignatures on temperate sub-Neptune waterworlds. Astrophys. J. Lett. 966,
L24 (2024).
S. D. Domagal-Goldman, V. S. Meadows, M. W. Claire, J. F. Kasting, Using
biogenic sulfur gases as remotely detectable biosignatures on anoxic planets.
Astrobiology 11, 419–441 (2011).
B. Bézard, B. Charnay, D. Blain, Methane as a dominant absorber in the
habitable-zone sub-Neptune K2-18 b. Nat. Astron. 6, 537–540 (2022).
M. Vogelsberger, et al., Introducing the Illustris Project: simulating the coevolution
of dark and visible matter in the Universe. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 444, 1518–
1547 (2014).

51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.

S. Seager, et al., The Exo-S probe class starshade mission in Techniques and
Instrumentation for Detection of Exoplanets VII, (SPIE, 2015), pp. 273–290.
S. P. Quanz, et al., Large Interferometer For Exoplanets (LIFE)-I. Improved
exoplanet detection yield estimates for a large mid-infrared space-interferometer
mission. Astron. Astrophys. 664, A21 (2022).
A. B. Johnson, et al., An optical feasibility study for STARLITE: superluminous
tomographic atmospheric reconstruction with laser-beacons for imaging terrestrial
exoplanets in Adaptive Optics Systems IX, (SPIE, 2024), pp. 755–765.
J. T. Wright, et al., The Case for Technosignatures: Why They May Be Abundant,
Long-lived, Highly Detectable, and Unambiguous. Astrophys. J. Lett. 927, L30
(2022).
S. G. Turyshev, V. T. Toth, Imaging extended sources with the solar gravitational
lens. Phys. Rev. D 100, 84018 (2019).
A. L. Carter, et al., A benchmark JWST near-infrared spectrum for the exoplanet
WASP-39 b. Nat. Astron., 1–12 (2024).

Supplementary Information for
Prospects for Detecting Signs of Life on Exoplanets in the JWST Era.
Sara Seager1,2,3,*, Luis Welbanks4, Lucas Ellerbroek5, William Bains6, Janusz J. Petkowski7,8
1

Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA
2
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA
3
Department of Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA
4
School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
5
Department of Astrophysics / IMAPP, Radboud University, PO Box 9010, 6500 GL, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands
6
School of Physics and Astronomy, Cardiff University, 4 The Parade, Cardiff CF24 3AA, UK
7
JJ Scientific, Warsaw, Mazowieckie, Poland
8
Faculty of Environmental Engineering, Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, 50-370 Wroclaw,
Poland
*Correspondence: Sara Seager
Email: seager@mit.edu
This PDF file includes:
Supplementary text
Tables S1 to S2
SI References

Supplementary Information Text
1. Biosignature Gas Candidate Detections Preceding the JWST Era.
There are few reports of biosignature gases detections that precede the coming era of the JWST exoplanet
atmosphere studies – the reports of phosphine (PH3) on Venus (1), methane (CH4) on Mars (2) and
hydrogen cyanide (HCN) and CH4, as prebiotic molecules, on GJ 1132b (3). All three cases exemplify the
difficulty of such observations, and the inherent uncertainty of data interpretation that will challenge the
JWST search for genuine signs of life. We summarize these examples briefly below.
The detection of an atmosphere on a rocky Earth-size exoplanet, GJ 1132b has been reported in 2021.
The Hubble WFC3 infrared atmospheric transmission spectrum has been claimed to show spectral
signatures of aerosol scattering, HCN, and CH4 gas in a low mean molecular weight atmosphere (3). Other
groups that reanalyzed the same Hubble data find a featureless spectrum, with no evidence of an
atmosphere (4, 5). The initial observations of GJ 1132b have also recently been followed up with JWST.
The thermal emission measurements of GJ 1132b with the Mid-Infrared Instrument Low-Resolution
Spectrometer (MIRI), in 5–12 μm, support the conclusion that GJ 1132b likely does not have a significant
atmosphere (6).
The search for biosignature gases in our on solar system is also controversial. The detection of CH4 on
Mars was first reported in 2004 from both a ground-based telescope (2) and by the Mars Express Orbiter
(7). Both found a weak signal with small values, 10 ± 3 ppb and 10 ± 5 ppb respectively. The initial
observations were followed by in situ detection by the TLS component of the SAM instrument on the Mars
Curiosity Rover (e.g. (8, 9)).
There is a continuing discussion on the existence of CH4 on Mars. The Trace Gas Orbiter (TGO) does not
observe methane and set a detection limit of 0.05 ppb despite hundreds of observations (10). Criticism that
the ground-based detections by (11) were simply a detection of the 13CH4 isotope in Earth’s atmosphere
(12) were later refuted (13). The in situ TLS/SAM findings of seasonal methane (9) come from an instrument
designed to avoid contamination (14), but have been argued to be contamination (15) or noise (16).
Methane is not expected to be present on Mars because it is a reduced gas and the Martian atmosphere
and surface are oxidizing environments. The presence of CH4 would indicate an unusual geochemistry or
leave the possibility for the presence of life. The relatively short ~300 year photochemical lifetime of
CH4 means that it must have a current-day (or very recent) source. This source, if present, is unknown. For
a summary of the Martian CH4 debate see (14, 17).
Phosphine (PH3) gas in the Venus atmosphere was reported at a few ppb levels in 2020 (1) and followed
up by evidence of PH3 from a data reanalysis of NASA’s 1978 Pioneer Venus Probe’s mass spectrometer
(18). While additional astronomical observations have supported the presence of PH 3 (19), the majority do
not detect the signal at all (20–22), instead ascribing the result to statistical or processing errors (23–25).
Some others do recover the signal and propose gas attribution to SO2 rather than PH3 (26, 27).
On Venus and Earth PH3 should not be present due to the oxidizing environment and short
PH3 photochemical lifetime. On Earth, PH3 only has biological or industrial sources (e.g. (28)). Work has
largely demonstrated that known abiotic chemistry—lightning, volcanoes, meteoritic delivery—in the Venus
environment does not produce the required amounts of PH3 to explain claimed levels (e.g. (29, 30)), though
future research may find viable pathways due to unknown PH 3 chemistry (Table S2). For a recent review
of observational and interpretation claims and refutations, see (31).
That the detection of methane on Mars is still not accepted 20 years after its first report, despite detections
from Earth, Mars orbit, and Mars highlights the challenges in addressing trace gases for questions [1] and
[2], let alone the more difficult question [3]. Here questions are defined in the main manuscript Section 4.
Similarly, the ongoing debate on the presence of PH3 on Venus shows that clear answers to questions [1]
and [2] likely will not be resolved without a dedicated space mission with an in-situ measurement capability.
The answer to question [3] also remains inconclusive (Table S2).

Although both Mars and Venus are challenging environments for which to imagine life’s existence—Mars
life needing to be confined subsurface and Venus’ to temperate cloud layers composed of sulfuric acid—
both are neighboring planets which we know far more about than we will know about any exoplanet. One
may have thought if there ever was a place where it would be possible to confirm a biosignature, it would
be a planet next door, especially as we can and have sent in situ probes to physically sample the
environment. Sampling an exoplanet remains in the realm of science fiction.
Table S1. Selected biosignature gases and their JWST observational prospects. The table shows selected
JWST observational prospects focusing on the diverse stellar and planetary scenarios. We only show
published computer-simulated predictions, not the proposed, or approved, JWST observational campaigns.
Biosignature Gas

Stellar Type

Planet Type

Atm.
Type
Archean
Earth
Archean
Earth
H2

JWST Detectable Flux or
Abundance / at λ (μm)
Not detectable (32–37)

JWST
Observation Time
N/A

O2/O3

Trappist-1
(M8V)
Trappist-1
(M8V)
LHS 1140
(M4.5)
Trappist-1
(M8V)

Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1e)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1e)
Sub Neptune
(LHS 1140 b)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1e)

Archean-Earth-like CH4
levels
? / NIRSpec [1-5 μm]

10 transits (35, 38,
39)
1 transit (40)

N2-O2

10–100
Tmol yr−1 / 2.9 μm

Sub Neptune
(LHS 1140 b)

H2

? / NIRSpec [1-5 μm]

Trappist-1
(M8V)
LHS 1140
(M4.5)

Rocky Earth-size
(Trappist-1e)
Sub Neptune
(LHS 1140 b)

N2-O2

1012 molecules cm−2 s−1 /
MIRI-LRS [5-14 μm]
? / NIRSpec [1-5 μm]

detectable “within
[JWST] mission
lifetime” (41)
10–50 transits
(40–200 hours)
(40)
10 transits (42)

N2O

LHS 1140
(M4.5)

CH3Cl/CH3Br pair

CH3OH

M5V (based on
GJ 876)

H2

CH3SH

Trappist-1
(M8V)
K2-18 (M2.8)

Rocky super
Earth (1.5 REarth,
5 MEarth)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1e)
Sub Neptune (K218b)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1e)
Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Sub Neptune
(LHS 1140 b)

CH4/CO2 pair
CH4/CO2 pair
N2O

CH3Cl

DMS
DMS
PH3

Trappist-1
(M8V)
Active M-dwarf

PH3

Active M-dwarf

PH3

LHS 1140
(M4.5)

NH3

M5V

NH3

M4V (based on
GJ 1132)

H2

Archean
Earth
H2
Archean
Earth
H2

10 ppm / G395M [2.875.14 μm] and MIRI-LRS [514 μm]
30 x Earth flux rate /
NIRSpec [1-5 μm]
20 x Earth flux rate / MIRILRS [5-14 μm]
30 x Earth flux rate /
NIRSpec [1-5 μm]
4 ppm / 7.8-11.5 μm in
emission

10–50 transits
(40–200 hours)
(40)
20 transits (43)
50 transits (35)
5 transits (44)
94 transits (35)
52 hours (28)

CO2

310 ppm / 7.8-11.5 μm in
emission

48 hours (28)

H2

1010 molecules cm−2 s−1 /
NIRSpec [1-5 μm]

Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)

H2

5 ppm NIRSpec [1-5 μm]
and MIRI-LRS [5-14 μm]

10–50 transits
(40–200 hours)
(40)
80 transits (45)

Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)

H2

14 ppm / MIRI-LRS [5-14
μm]

3 transits (46)

NH3

LHS 1140
(M4.5)

Sub Neptune
(LHS 1140 b)

H2

8.4x1010 molecules cm−2
s−1 / NIRSpec [1-5 μm]

Isoprene

M5V

H2

Formaldehyde
(CH2O) and other
carbonyls
Formaldehyde
(CH2O) and other
carbonyls
HCN

M4V (based on
GJ 876)

3x1013 molecules cm-2 s-1 /
NIRSpec [1-5 μm] and
MIRI
Not detectable (48)

NO2

M dwarf

Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Rocky super
Earth (1.75 REarth,
10 MEarth)
Rocky Earth size

SF6

M5V (based on
GJ 876)

H2

SF6

Trappist-1
(M8V)
M5V (based on
GJ 876)
Trappist-1
(M8V)
White dwarf

Rocky super
Earth (1.5 REarth,
5 MEarth)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1f)
Rocky super
Earth (1.5 REarth,
5 MEarth)
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1f)
Rocky Earth size

M dwarf
Trappist-1
(M8V)

Rocky Earth size
Rocky Earth size
(Trappist-1f)

N2
N2-O2

NF3
NF3
CFCs
CFCs
PFCs

M4V (based on
GJ 1132)
M4V (based on
GJ 1132)

H2

10–50 transits
(40–200 hours)
(40)
20 transits (47)
N/A

H2

3.1 ppm / MIRI-LRS [5-14
μm]

3 transits (46)

H2

1.7 ppm / G395M [2.875.14 μm]

3 transits (46)

N2

20 x present Earth’s atm.
abundance
1 ppm / 9-12 μm

500 hours (49)

100 ppm / MIRI-LRS [5-14
μm]
1 ppm / 9-12 μm

19 transits (51)

100 ppm / MIRI-LRS [5-14
μm]
10 x present Earth’s atm.
abundance
>1 ppb
100 ppm / MIRI-LRS [5-14
μm]

16 transits (51)

N2-O2
H2
N2-O2
N2

Tens of transits
(50)

Tens of transits
(50)

30-40 hours (52)
100-300 hours (53)
5 transits (51)

Table S2. False positive assessment of biosignature gases.

Biosig. Gas
O2/O3

CH4
N2O
CH3Cl
CH3Br
CH3OH
CH3SH
DMS

PH3

NH3
Isoprene
Carbonyls
HCN
NO2
SF6
NF3
CFCs
PFCs

Proposed Abiotic Source
Massive O2 atmospheres (with partial pressures pO2 ≥10 bar) are postulated to exist via abiotic
accumulation on M-dwarf-hosted exoplanets. The main proposed mechanism is XUV-driven
photodissociation and escape during the extended pre-main sequence runaway greenhouse
phase (54). Terrestrial planets orbiting any star type may develop O2-dominated atmospheres as a
result of H2O photolysis due to inefficient cold trap (55). Massive O2 atmospheres are thought to
only form abiotically, and can be identified by the presence of O2-O2 dimers (56, 57). Abiotic O2
and O3 can also form through planetary photochemistry of CO2 (58, 59). Conditions for O2 false
positives on habitable zone planets around Sun-like stars have also been explored (60).
Methane can be produced geologically, e.g., in the serpentinization reaction but large amounts of
CH4 are unlikely to have volcanic origin (61). CH4 can also be produced by impacts (62, 63). Its
potential as a biosignature highly depends on the stellar and planetary context (64).
Significant abiotic sources of N2O are limited. Potential abiotic sources like reduction of nitric oxide
(NO) by ferrous iron (chemidenitrification), lightning, volcanic activity, or photochemical reduction
of NO can be ruled out or identified by relevant stellar and planetary context (41).
Meteoritic infall and volcanism could be the source of small amounts of abiotic CH3Cl (42).
Meteoritic infall and volcanism could be the source of small amounts of abiotic CH3Br (42).
There are no known significant abiotic CH3OH sources on terrestrial planets (43).
Geological and hydrothermal sources are unlikely to generate CH3SH in significant amounts (65).
Laboratory photochemical experiments demonstrate the abiotic production of organosulfur gases
(66).
Geological and hydrothermal sources are unlikely to generate DMS in significant amounts (65).
Laboratory photochemical experiments demonstrate the abiotic production of organosulfur gases
(66). DMS may also be produced abiotically in cometary matter (67) and the interstellar medium
(68).
No known significant abiotic source on rocky exoplanets (28). In the context of Venus: no
significant conventional abiotic sources known (29, 31). Volcanoes are an inefficient source of PH3
(30). Other potential abiotic sources like reduction with Fe-rich minerals (69) or synthesis over
acidic dust in Venus' atmosphere await confirmation (70).
No known significant abiotic source on rocky exoplanets (45). Volcanic, hydrothermal, and other
processes (e.g. nitrogen photoreduction on TiO2 containing sands) are too inefficient to result in a
detectable NH3 (45).
Isoprene (C5H8) has no known false positive sources (47).
Formation of formaldehyde (CH2O) via photochemical processes is potentially possible (46, 71)
although its accumulation in the atmosphere to significant amounts is unlikely (48).
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) can be produced via UV photochemistry (46, 72–75), surface
hydrothermal systems (76), impacts (77, 78), and lightning (79).
Produced via lightning from atmospheric N2 and CO2 (65).
Sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) has very few false positives. Trace amounts of SF6 are associated with
volcanic activity (80–82). SF6 can be released from fluorite minerals (83). H-depleted planets could
potentially produce abiotic SF6 in greater amounts than on Earth (50).
Nitrogen trifluoride (NF3) has no known significant false positive sources. NF3 is not known to be
released from any fluorine-containing minerals apart from a single exception of purple fluorite (WF)
(83).
Various CFCs can be produced in trace amounts by volcanoes (e.g. (84, 85)) or can be detected
in trace amounts in fluorite minerals (83).
Abiotic CF4 is produced geologically in trace amounts (e.g. (81–83)).

Supplementary References
1.

J. S. Greaves, et al., Phosphine gas in the cloud decks of Venus. Nat. Astron. 5, 655–664
(2021).

2.

V. A. Krasnopolsky, J. P. Maillard, T. C. Owen, Detection of methane in the martian
atmosphere: Evidence for life? Icarus 172, 537–547 (2004).

3.

M. R. Swain, et al., Detection of an atmosphere on a rocky exoplanet. Astron. J. 161, 213
(2021).

4.

L. V Mugnai, et al., ARES.* V. No evidence for molecular absorption in the HST WFC3
spectrum of GJ 1132 b. Astron. J. 161, 284 (2021).

5.

J. E. Libby-Roberts, et al., The featureless HST/WFC3 transmission spectrum of the
rocky exoplanet GJ 1132b: no evidence for a cloud-free primordial atmosphere and
constraints on starspot contamination. Astron. J. 164, 59 (2022).

6.

Q. Xue, et al., JWST Thermal Emission of the Terrestrial Exoplanet GJ 1132b. Astrophys.
J. Lett. 973, L8 (2024).

7.

V. Formisano, S. Atreya, T. Encrenaz, N. Ignatiev, M. Giuranna, Detection of methane in
the atmosphere of Mars. Science (80-. ). 306, 1758–1761 (2004).

8.

C. R. Webster, et al., Mars methane detection and variability at Gale crater. Science (80-.
). 347, 415–417 (2015).

9.

C. R. Webster, et al., Background levels of methane in Mars’ atmosphere show strong
seasonal variations. Science (80-. ). 360, 1093–1096 (2018).

10.

O. Korablev, et al., No detection of methane on Mars from early ExoMars Trace Gas
Orbiter observations. Nature 568, 517–520 (2019).

11.

M. J. Mumma, et al., Strong Release of Methane. Science (80-. ). 323, 1041–1045
(2009).

12.

K. Zahnle, R. S. Freedman, D. C. Catling, Is there methane on Mars? Icarus 212, 493–
503 (2011).

13.

G. L. Villanueva, et al., A sensitive search for organics (CH4, CH3OH, H2CO, C2H6,
C2H2, C2H4), hydroperoxyl (HO2), nitrogen compounds (N2O, NH3, HCN) and chlorine
species (HCl, CH3Cl) on Mars using ground-based high-resolution infrared spectroscopy.
Icarus 223, 11–27 (2013).

14.

C. R. Webster, et al., Day-night differences in Mars methane suggest nighttime
containment at Gale crater. Astron. Astrophys. 650, A166 (2021).

15.

B. K. Zahnle, Play it again, SAM. Science (80-. ). 347, 370–371 (2015).

16.

E. Gillen, P. B. Rimmer, D. C. Catling, Statistical analysis of Curiosity data shows no
evidence for a strong seasonal cycle of Martian methane. Icarus 336, 113407 (2020).

17.

J. L. Grenfell, et al., Atmospheric processes affecting methane on Mars. Icarus 382,
114940 (2022).

18.

R. Mogul, S. S. Limaye, M. J. Way, J. A. Cordova, Venus’ Mass Spectra Show Signs of
Disequilibria in the Middle Clouds. Geophys. Res. Lett., e2020GL091327 (2021).

19.

D. L. Clements, Venus Phosphine: Updates and lessons learned. arXiv Prepr.
arXiv2409.13438 (2024).

20.

L. Trompet, et al., Phosphine in Venus’ atmosphere: Detection attempts and upper limits
above the cloud top assessed from the SOIR/VEx spectra. Astron. Astrophys. 645, L4
(2020).

21.

T. Encrenaz, et al., A stringent upper limit of the PH3 abundance at the cloud top of
Venus. Astron. Astrophys. 643, L5 (2020).

22.

M. A. Cordiner, et al., Phosphine in the Venusian Atmosphere: A Strict Upper Limit from
SOFIA GREAT Observations. Geophys. Res. Lett., e2022GL101055 (2022).

23.

A. B. Akins, A. P. Lincowski, V. S. Meadows, P. G. Steffes, Complications in the ALMA
Detection of Phosphine at Venus. Astrophys. J. Lett. 907, L27 (2021).

24.

M. A. Thompson, The statistical reliability of 267-GHz JCMT observations of Venus: no
significant evidence for phosphine absorption. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. Lett. 501, L18–
L22 (2021).

25.

I. A. G. Snellen, L. Guzman-Ramirez, M. R. Hogerheijde, A. P. S. Hygate, F. F. S. van
der Tak, Re-analysis of the 267 GHz ALMA observations of Venus-No statistically
significant detection of phosphine. Astron. Astrophys. 644, L2 (2020).

26.

G. L. Villanueva, et al., No evidence of phosphine in the atmosphere of Venus from
independent analyses. Nat. Astron. 5, 631–635 (2021).

27.

A. P. Lincowski, et al., Claimed detection of PH3 in the clouds of Venus is consistent with
mesospheric SO2. Astrophys. J. Lett. 908, L44-52 (2021).

28.

C. Sousa-Silva, et al., Phosphine as a biosignature gas in exoplanet atmospheres.
Astrobiology 20, 235–268 (2020).

29.

W. Bains, et al., Phosphine on Venus Cannot be Explained by Conventional Processes.
Astrobiology 21, 1277–1304 (2021).

30.

W. Bains, et al., Constraints on the production of phosphine by Venusian volcanoes.
Universe 8, 54 (2022).

31.

W. Bains, et al., Source of phosphine on Venus—An unsolved problem. Front. Astron.
Sp. Sci. 11, 1372057 (2024).

32.

F. Wunderlich, et al., Detectability of atmospheric features of Earth-like planets in the
habitable zone around M dwarfs. Astron. Astrophys. 624, A49 (2019).

33.

M. T. Gialluca, T. D. Robinson, S. Rugheimer, F. Wunderlich, Characterizing
atmospheres of transiting Earth-like exoplanets orbiting M dwarfs with James Webb
Space Telescope. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pacific 133, 54401 (2021).

34.

F. Wunderlich, et al., Distinguishing between Wet and Dry Atmospheres of TRAPPIST-1
e and f. Astrophys. J. 901, 126 (2020).

35.

V. S. Meadows, A. P. Lincowski, J. Lustig-Yaeger, The Feasibility of Detecting
Biosignatures in the TRAPPIST-1 Planetary System with JWST. Planet. Sci. J. 4, 192
(2023).

36.

J. Lustig-Yaeger, V. S. Meadows, A. P. Lincowski, The detectability and characterization

of the TRAPPIST-1 exoplanet atmospheres with JWST. Astron. J. 158, 27 (2019).
37.

D. Pidhorodetska, T. J. Fauchez, G. L. Villanueva, S. D. Domagal-Goldman, R. K.
Kopparapu, Detectability of molecular signatures on TRAPPIST-1e through transmission
spectroscopy simulated for future space-based observatories. Astrophys. J. Lett. 898,
L33 (2020).

38.

J. Krissansen-Totton, R. Garland, P. Irwin, D. C. Catling, Detectability of biosignatures in
anoxic atmospheres with the James Webb Space Telescope: a TRAPPIST-1e case
study. Astron. J. 156, 114 (2018).

39.

T. Mikal-Evans, Detecting the proposed CH4–CO2 biosignature pair with the James
Webb Space Telescope: TRAPPIST-1e and the effect of cloud/haze. Mon. Not. R.
Astron. Soc. 510, 980–991 (2022).

40.

F. Wunderlich, et al., Detectability of biosignatures on LHS 1140 b. Astron. Astrophys.
647, A48 (2021).

41.

E. W. Schwieterman, et al., Evaluating the plausible range of N2O biosignatures on exoearths: An integrated biogeochemical, photochemical, and spectral modeling approach.
Astrophys. J. 937, 109 (2022).

42.

M. Leung, E. W. Schwieterman, M. N. Parenteau, T. J. Fauchez, Alternative methylated
biosignatures. I. Methyl bromide, a capstone biosignature. Astrophys. J. 938, 6 (2022).

43.

J. Huang, S. Seager, J. J. Petkowski, Z. Zhan, S. Ranjan, Methanol—A Poor
Biosignature Gas in Exoplanet Atmospheres. Astrophys. J. 933, 6 (2022).

44.

S.-M. Tsai, H. Innes, N. F. Wogan, E. W. Schwieterman, Biogenic sulfur gases as
biosignatures on temperate sub-Neptune waterworlds. Astrophys. J. Lett. 966, L24
(2024).

45.

J. Huang, S. Seager, J. J. Petkowski, S. Ranjan, Z. Zhan, Assessment of ammonia as a
biosignature gas in exoplanet atmospheres. Astrobiology 22, 171–191 (2022).

46.

A. B. Claringbold, P. B. Rimmer, S. Rugheimer, O. Shorttle, Prebiosignature molecules
can be detected in temperate exoplanet atmospheres with JWST. Astron. J. 166, 39
(2023).

47.

Z. Zhan, et al., Assessment of Isoprene as a Possible Biosignature Gas in Exoplanets
with Anoxic Atmospheres. Astrobiology 21, 765–792 (2021).

48.

Z. Zhan, J. Huang, S. Seager, J. J. Petkowski, S. Ranjan, Organic Carbonyls Are Poor
Biosignature Gases in Exoplanet Atmospheres but May Generate Significant CO.
Astrophys. J. 930, 133 (2022).

49.

R. Kopparapu, G. Arney, J. Haqq-Misra, J. Lustig-Yaeger, G. Villanueva, Nitrogen dioxide
pollution as a signature of extraterrestrial technology. Astrophys. J. 908, 164 (2021).

50.

S. Seager, et al., Fully fluorinated non-carbon compounds NF3 and SF6 as ideal
technosignature gases. Sci. Rep. 13, 13576 (2023).

51.

E. W. Schwieterman, et al., Artificial Greenhouse Gases as Exoplanet Technosignatures.
Astrophys. J. 969, 20 (2024).

52.

H. W. Lin, G. G. Abad, A. Loeb, Detecting industrial pollution in the atmospheres of earthlike exoplanets. Astrophys. J. Lett. 792, L7 (2014).

53.

J. Haqq-Misra, et al., Detectability of Chlorofluorocarbons in the Atmospheres of
Habitable M-dwarf Planets. Planet. Sci. J. 3, 60 (2022).

54.

R. Luger, R. Barnes, Extreme water loss and abiotic O2 buildup on planets throughout
the habitable zones of M dwarfs. Astrobiology 15, 119–143 (2015).

55.

R. Wordsworth, R. Pierrehumbert, Abiotic Oxygen-dominated Atmospheres on Terrestrial
Habitable Zone Planets. Astrophys. J. 785, L20 (2014).

56.

A. Misra, V. Meadows, M. Claire, D. Crisp, Using dimers to measure biosignatures and
atmospheric pressure for terrestrial exoplanets. Astrobiology 14, 67–86 (2014).

57.

E. W. Schwieterman, et al., Identifying Planetary Biosignature Impostors: Spectral
Features of Co and O(4) Resulting From Abiotic O(2)/O(3) Production. Astrophys. journal.
Lett. 819, L34 (2016).

58.

V. S. Meadows, et al., Exoplanet Biosignatures: Understanding Oxygen as a Biosignature
in the Context of Its Environment. Astrobiology 18, 630–662 (2018).

59.

V. S. Meadows, Reflections on O2 as a biosignature in exoplanetary atmospheres.
Astrobiology 17, 1022–1052 (2017).

60.

J. Krissansen‐Totton, J. J. Fortney, F. Nimmo, N. Wogan, Oxygen False Positives on
Habitable Zone Planets Around Sun‐Like Stars. AGU Adv. 2, e2020AV000294 (2021).

61.

N. Wogan, J. Krissansen-Totton, D. C. Catling, Abundant atmospheric methane from
volcanism on terrestrial planets is unlikely and strengthens the case for methane as a
biosignature. Planet. Sci. J. 1, 58 (2020).

62.

M. E. Kress, C. P. McKay, Formation of methane in comet impacts: implications for Earth,
Mars, and Titan. Icarus 168, 475–483 (2004).

63.

Y. Sekine, S. Sugita, T. Kadono, T. Matsui, Methane production by large iron meteorite
impacts on early Earth. J. Geophys. Res. Planets 108 (2003).

64.

M. A. Thompson, J. Krissansen-Totton, N. Wogan, M. Telus, J. J. Fortney, The case and
context for atmospheric methane as an exoplanet biosignature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
119, e2117933119 (2022).

65.

S. Seager, M. Schrenk, W. Bains, An astrophysical view of Earth-based metabolic
biosignature gases. Astrobiology 12, 61–82 (2012).

66.

N. W. Reed, et al., Abiotic Production of Dimethyl Sulfide, Carbonyl Sulfide, and Other
Organosulfur Gases via Photochemistry: Implications for Biosignatures and Metabolic
Potential. Astrophys. J. Lett. 973, L38 (2024).

67.

N. Hänni, et al., Evidence for Abiotic Dimethyl Sulfide in Cometary Matter. Astrophys. J.
976, 74 (2024).

68.

M. Sanz-Novo, et al., On the abiotic origin of dimethyl sulfide: discovery of DMS in the
Interstellar Medium. arXiv Prepr. arXiv2501.08892 (2025).

69.

T. Feng, M. A. Pasek, Phosphorus acid volatility in Venus’s atmosphere and its reduction
with iron-rich minerals in 2024 Astrobiology Science Conference, (AGU, 2024).

70.

K. Mráziková, et al., A Novel Abiotic Pathway for Phosphine Synthesis over Acidic Dust in
Venus’ Atmosphere. Astrobiology 24, 407–422 (2024).

71.

J. P. Pinto, G. R. Gladstone, Y. L. Yung, Photochemical production of formaldehyde in
Earth’s primitive atmosphere. Science (80-. ). 210, 183–185 (1980).

72.

P. B. Rimmer, S. Rugheimer, Hydrogen cyanide in nitrogen-rich atmospheres of rocky
exoplanets. Icarus 329, 124–131 (2019).

73.

B. K. D. Pearce, P. W. Ayers, R. E. Pudritz, A consistent reduced network for HCN
chemistry in early earth and Titan atmospheres: Quantum calculations of reaction rate
coefficients. J. Phys. Chem. A 123, 1861–1873 (2019).

74.

F. Tian, J. F. Kasting, K. Zahnle, Revisiting HCN formation in Earth’s early atmosphere.
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 308, 417–423 (2011).

75.

K. J. Zahnle, Photochemistry of methane and the formation of hydrocyanic acid (HCN) in
the Earth’s early atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 91, 2819–2834 (1986).

76.

P. B. Rimmer, O. Shorttle, A Surface Hydrothermal Source of Nitriles and Isonitriles. Life
14, 498 (2024).

77.

M. Ferus, et al., High energy radical chemistry formation of HCN-rich atmospheres on
early Earth. Sci. Rep. 7, 6275 (2017).

78.

N. F. Wogan, D. C. Catling, K. J. Zahnle, R. Lupu, Origin-of-life Molecules in the
Atmosphere after Big Impacts on the Early Earth. Planet. Sci. J. 4, 169 (2023).

79.

A. Ardaseva, et al., Lightning Chemistry on Earth-like Exoplanets. arXiv 470, 187–196
(2017).

80.

E. Busenberg, L. N. Plummer, Dating young groundwater with sulfur hexafluoride: Natural
and anthropogenic sources of sulfur hexafluoride. Water Resour. Res. 36, 3011–3030
(2000).

81.

J. Harnisch, A. Eisenhauer, Natural CF4 and SF6 on Earth. Geophys. Res. Lett. 25,
2401–2404 (1998).

82.

D. A. Deeds, et al., Evidence for crustal degassing of CF4 and SF6 in Mojave Desert
groundwaters. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 72, 999–1013 (2008).

83.

J. Harnisch, M. Frische, R. Borchers, A. Eisenhauer, A. Jordan, Natural fluorinated
organics in fluorite and rocks. Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, 1883–1886 (2000).

84.

A. Jordan, J. Harnisch, R. Borchers, F. Le Guern, H. Shinohara, Volcanogenic
halocarbons. Environ. Sci. Technol. 34, 1122–1124 (2000).

85.

V. A. Isidorov, I. G. Zenkevich, B. V Ioffe, Volatile organic compounds in solfataric gases.
J. Atmos. Chem. 10, 329–340 (1990).

